# Methods

## Mice

Except where noted, adult (at least 8 weeks of age) male and female F1 hybrid (C57BL/6NTac X 129S6/SvEvTac) wild-type (WT) mice were used in all experiments. Mice were bred at the Hospital for Sick Children, provided with food and water ad libitum, and group housed (4 per cage) on a 12 h light/dark cycle. All mice were briefly single housed, transported, and handled once daily for 6 days prior to experiments. All experiments were performed during light-phase. All procedures were conducted in accordance with policies of the Hospital for Sick Children Animal Care and Use Committee and conformed to both Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guidelines on Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
For experiments involving PV^+^ interneuron inhibition, heterozygous PV-Cre knockin driver mice (B6;129P2-Pvalbtm1(cre)Arbr/J) maintained on a C57BL/6 genetic background were used. These mice express Cre recombinase in PV neurons, without disrupting endogenous PV expression. PV-Cre mice were obtained from Jackson Labs and were originally generated by Silvia Arber, FMI [@hippenmeyer_developmental_2005].

## Auditory Fear Conditioning

Auditory fear training involved placing mice into a conditioning chamber and, 2 minutes later, presenting a tone (2,800 Hz, 85 dB, 30 s) that co-terminated with a 2s footshock. Testing was performed 24 hours later by placing mice in a novel context and, after a 2 minute baseline period, presenting an identical tone for 1 minute. During testing, an overhead camera captured the animal’s activity and was used to assess percentage time spent freezing during the tone (defined as an immobilized, crouched position with an absence of any movement except respiration [@fanselow_naloxone_1979].

## Immunohistochemistry

We used the expression of Arc protein in neurons active following training or a memory test as a proxy for identifying neurons that compose part of an engram supporting that memory. Arc protein is reliably elevated in excitatory neurons 90 min after activity [@guzowski_mapping_2005] and has been used as a proxy for visualizing neuronal components of an engram [@gouty-colomer_arc_2015].
90 minutes after the delivery of the tone during training or testing, mice were transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and brains removed. Brains remained in PFA for 1 day and were then transferred into cryoprotectant solution (20% sucrose) at 4 ºC. Three days later, brains were sectioned into 50 μm sections using a cryostat with an inter-slice interval of 100 um. Slices were then washed and incubated overnight with Arc polyclonal rabbit antibody (1:500, Synaptic Systems, Cat. No. 156 003) at 4 ºC . In the experiment involving manipulations of shock intensity, slices were also   incubated with NeuN polyclonal mouse antibody (1:1000, Millipore, MAB377). Staining was visualized either with 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) or fluorescent secondary goat anti-rabbit Alexa 288 (1:1000, Life Technologies, Cat. No. A11034) and goat anti-mouse Alexa 568 (1:1000, Life Technologies, Cat. No. A11004) antibodies. 
Measures of Arc^+^ cell density by area in the first experiment using DAB were obtained by imaging sections under a 10x Nikon light microscope and manually counting the number of Arc^+^ cells in these images with ImageJ software (NIH) (Schneider et al., 2012) by experimenters blind to the treatment condition. ANOVAs with post-hoc Fisher’s LSD tests were conducted to compare Arc^+^ cell density between different treatment groups within each amygdala nucleus.

## AAV Vector

The AAV8-hSyn-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry vector was obtained from the UNC Vector Core (Chapel Hill, NC). This adeno-associated virus (AAV) contains a double floxed inverse open reading frame of hM4Di fused to mCherry that is expressed from the human synapsin (hSyn) promoter after recombination by Cre recombinase [@krashes_rapid_2011]. The average titer of the virus stocks was 4.0 × 107 infectious units/ml. Mice were allowed to recover for 4 weeks for maximal viral expression before performing behavioural experiments. 

## Surgery

Before surgery, mice were pre-treated with atropine sulfate (0.1 mg/kg, ip), anesthetized with chloral hydrate (400 mg/kg, ip) and placed in a stereotaxic frame. Skin was retracted and holes were drilled in the skull above the amygdala (AP = -1.4 mm, ML = ±3.4 mm, V = -5.0 mm from bregma). AAV-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry (1.0 μl) was infused bilaterally into the amygdala. After surgery, mice recovered for 4 hours before being returned to their standard housing.

## catFISH 

Mice were trained with various shock conditions (1 x 0.4 mA, 1 x 0.7 mA, and 3 x 0.7 mA) in order to create memories of different strengths. A group that received a shock immediately upon entering the chamber was included as a control. 5 minutes after either training or testing, animals were sacrificed and brains were subsequently processed with catFISH. Brains were then imaged and analyzed with systematic stereological procedures to identify the proportion of *Arc^+^* neurons in the LA.
We performed catFISH for *Arc* mRNA to identify neurons activated during fear conditioning or retrieval. 5 min after either auditory fear conditioning or testing, brains were removed and frozen. Tissue was then sectioned (20 m) and prepared for FISH according to previously described protocols [@han_neuronal_2007]. Visualization of *Arc* mRNA was performed through the use of a DIG-conjugated anti-sense probe corresponding to the Arc open reading frame. In order to minimize differences in staining, sections from 4 mice were mounted together on one slide. After hybridization and amplification of *Arc* and H1a signals, counterstaining with Hoechst 33258 to visualize nuclei was performed.

Following catFISH processing, sections were imaged on a laser confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 710) to obtain optical z-stack series with a step size ≤ 1 m apart.  Stacks were analyzed for nuclear *Arc* intranuclear fluorescence by two individuals unaware of treatment condition. Stereological counting was then performed by two individuals unaware of treatment condition, with at least four sections counted for each mouse.

## Stereological Counting	
In order to accurately determine the proportion of neurons active in the LA during auditory fear training and testing, we used unbiased stereological principles and systematic sampling techniques to obtain the ratio of Arc-expressing neurons to the number of total neurons. For the experiment involving manipulation of shock intensity, it was possible to use expression of the neuron-specific protein NeuN to obtain a measure of the neuronal population directly. However, for experiments involving  AAV-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry, the nuclear stain 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) was used to obtain a measure of the total cellular population that was later adjusted based on an empirically determined estimate of the ratio of neurons to total cells in the LA. Several sections containing both DAPI and NeuN were analyzed to obtain this empirical estimate (78.9% ± 2.355, n = 10). Stereological counts were adjusted by this ratio without affecting the relationships between groups.

Counting was performed by an experimenter blind to the treatment condition using the Optical Fractionator probe within Stereo Investigator (version 10, MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT USA). Counting was performed on every third section (50 μm thickness, at least 5 sections per mouse) from the left hemisphere. A counting frame of 120 μm x 120 μm was randomly distributed according to a 250 μm x 250 μm grid throughout the LA. Section thickness was recorded at every sampling site to compensate for any potential thickness variation across the sections due to tissue processing. A 12 μm dissector height was used with 2 μm guard zones placed at the top and bottom of each section. Coefficient of Error values, determined by Gundersen’s method [@gundersen_efficiency_1987]  (m=1) were < 0.11 in all samples. For analysis of LA subnuclei, contours were drawn between regions as defined by a stereotaxic atlas [@paxinos_mouse_2010]. All stereological data was collected only from the left hemisphere in order to avoid potential hemispheric differences in Arc activity, although preliminary results showed no significant difference in Arc^+^ cell density between hemispheres (paired t-test, P > 0.1).

## CNO
CNO (Toronto Research Chemicals [TRC]) was prepared in a stock solution of 10 mg/ml in DMSO and subsequently diluted to a working concentration of 1 mg/ml in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). CNO was injected intraperitoneally at a dosage of 2.0 mg/kg 1hr before training. Vehicle solution used as a control consisted solely of PBS.
 
