# Results


## Arc expression increases in the amygdala after fear conditioning
Similar to previous studies  [@gouty-colomer_arc_2015, @reijmers_localization_2007, @tayler_reactivation_2013], Arc protein expression was visualized 90 min after memory retrieval to identify neurons that were active during memory encoding or retrieval as part of an engram. Specifically, mice were trained in auditory fear conditioning and the number of neurons positive for Arc (Arc^+^) 90 min following various manipulations (e.g., initial training or memory recall) was examined (Figure 1a). Arc^+^ neuron density (per 100 µm2) was assessed in the LA, BA, central amygdala (CeA) and intercalated cell masses (ITC) (Figure 4.1b). Non-learning control groups were also included (homecage mice, mice exposed to tone alone, chamber alone or an immediate shock) [@frankland_consolidation_2004-1, @zelikowsky_neuronal_2014].

There was a significant increase in the number of Arc^+^ neurons throughout the amygdala after both training and testing (Figure 4.1c). Arc^+^ cell density was elevated both after training and testing (in comparison to homecage controls) in the LA [F(5, 36) = 10.63, P < 0.001], BA [F(5, 36) = 5.20, P < 0.001] and CeA [F(5, 36) = 4.99, P < 0.001]. However, there was no significant difference in Arc^+^ density between treatments in the ITC region [F(5, 36) = 1.86, P > 0.05]. Importantly, the control tone alone, chamber alone or immediate shock groups did not differ from the homecage group in any amygdala region (P > 0.1). Fear training and testing induced a similar number of Arc^+^ neurons in many amygdala regions (LA, P > 0.5; BA, P > 0.1; CeA, P > 0.5; ITC, P > 0.5), suggesting that a similar number of neurons were active during encoding and retrieval of an auditory fear memory.

![**Increase in Arc expression throughout the amygdala after auditory fear training and testing.** (a) Experimental procedure. Mice in the Train group were perfused 90 mins after fear condition in which a tone was paired with a footshock. Tone Alone, Chamber Alone and Immediate shock groups were similarly treated and perfused 90 min later . The test group was perfused 90 mins after a testing session in a novel context 24 hr after initial training. (b) Representative image of the amygdala after immunohistochemical Arc staining with amygdaloid nuclei defined according to Paxinos and Franklin. Scale bar = 50 μm. (c) Arc+ cell density increased following training and testing groups in all nuclei of the amygdala except the intercalated regions (n = 8, HC; n = 8, Tone alone; n = 7, Chamber alone; n = 5, Immediate shock; n = 7, Train; n = 7, Test). * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.001 for Fisher’s LSD post-hoc test for multiple comparisons. Data is expressed as mean ± sem. \label{ref_a_figure}](source/figures/figure_1.jpg)

## Memory retrieval activates a constant proportion of cells in the amygdala despite varying memory strength
In order to assess the relationship between memory strength and the size of the Arc^+^ engram, the intensity of the CS footshock delivered during auditory fear conditioning was manipulated (0.3 mA, 0.5 mA, 0.75 mA). 90 min following fear conditioning, the percentage of neurons involved in the engram was assessed through immunohistochemical staining for Arc protein and the neuron-specific NeuN protein [@duan_novel_2016] with systematic stereological counting performed to quantify the ratio between these two labeled populations. 

There was a consistent proportion of Arc^+^ neurons (10-15%) in the LA regardless of memory strength. Although varying shock intensity produced different levels of freezing during the test (Figure 4.2a; F(2, 14) = 4.39, P > 0.05) consistent with different strengths of memory, no difference in the proportion of Arc^+^ neurons was observed between groups that received fear conditioning (Figure 4.2b; F(2, 14) = 0.22, P > 0.5). Arc^+^ proportion increased in comparison to homecage controls in all trained groups (Tukey’s post-hoc). Furthermore, linear regression analysis showed no relationship between the amount time a mouse spent freezing to the tone and the proportion of Arc^+^ cells in the LA (Figure 4.2c, R2 = .003), suggesting that a similar proportion of neurons are allocated to the engram regardless of the intensity of training conditions or the strength of learned fear associations.

![**Consistent proportion of Arc+ neurons in the LA following auditory fear retrieval despite varying degrees of freezing.** (a) Increasing shock intensity during training produced higher levels of freezing during the test, consistent with greater fear memory. (b) The proportion of Arc+ neurons was increased following testing, but no difference in Arc+ proportion was observed between groups trained with varying intensities of shock. (c) No relationship was seen between time spent freezing to tone and Arc+ proportion. (d) Examples of Arc (green) and NeuN (red) staining in the LA of HC mice and those treated with varying shock intensity. Scale bars, 50 μm. (HC, n = 7; 0.3 mA footshock intensity, n = 5; n = 7, 0.5 mA; n = 5, 0.75 mA). * P < 0.05 with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons. Data is expressed as mean ± sem. \label{ref_a_figure}](source/figures/figure_2.jpg)


## *Arc* mRNA increases in a stable proportion of LA neurons during fear conditioning  
In order to gain a more temporally precise measure of the engram, we performed cellular compartmental analysis of temporal activity by fluorescence in situ hybridization (catFISH) to identify LA neurons expressing *Arc* mRNA during either encoding or retrieval or of an auditory fear memory. Expression of *Arc* mRNA in the nucleus peaks within 5 minutes of neural activity [@guzowski_mapping_2005],. Thus, by sacrificing animals 5 minutes after auditory fear training or testing, it was possible to  to identify active neuronal ensembles with a high degree of temporal accuracy.
Although different training conditions produced varying degrees of freezing to the tone (Figure 4.3a; F(2, 7) = 5.30, P < 0.05), there was no difference in the proportion of *Arc*^+^ cells between any groups exposed to fear conditioning (Figure 4.3b; F(4, 10) = 0.99, P > 0.05). Furthermore, no difference was observed in the number of *Arc*^+^ neurons between brains examined after training or testing. All groups that received training differed from the immediate shock control, which exhibited very low *Arc* signal (all groups vs immediate shock, P < 0.001). No relationship was observed between *Arc*^+^ proportion and percentage time spent freezing (Figure 4.3c, R2 = 0.096), suggesting that the proportion of LA neurons that are strongly activated during memory encoding and retrieval 24 hr later is unrelated to the strength of learned associations.


![**Consistent proportion of cells expressing _Arc_ mRNA in the LA following auditory fear retrieval despite varying degrees of freezing** (a) Increased shock intensity produced greater time spent freezing to tone during testing. (b) No difference in *Arc+* proportion was observed between groups trained with varying intensities of shock (c) No relationship was seen between time spent freezing to tone and *Arc+* proportion within mice. (d) Example of catFISH staining for *Arc* (green) and Hoescht (blue) in the LA. Scale bar, 50 μm. (n = 3, immediate shock; n = 3, 0.4 mA Train; n = 4, 0.4 mA Test; n = 2, 0.7 mA Train; n = 3, 0.7 mA Test; n = 3, 3 x 0.7 mA Test).  * P < 0.05 with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons. Data is expressed as mean ± sem. \label{ref_a_figure}](source/figures/figure_3.jpg)


## Inhibition of PV^+^ interneurons during conditioning increases the size of the lateral amygdala engram
In both the LA and the basal amygdala (BA), local inhibition is predominantly mediated by GABAergic parvalbumin (PV) interneurons [@ehrlich_amygdala_2009, @spampanato_interneurons_2011], which form a broad, inter-connected inhibitory network that responds to sensory input [@szinyei_putative_2000] and tightly controls the activity of LA principal neurons through plastic, perisomatic synapses (@freund_perisomatic_2007, @trouche_fear_2013). Because of this, PV^+^ interneurons represent a promising candidate for mediating inhibitory interactions between principal neurons.
To determine whether PV^+^ interneurons play a role in constraining the size of the LA engram, we used inhibitory DREADDS (designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs) to silence their activity during training. DREADDS are modified G-protein coupled receptors activated by the synthetic ligand clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) that allow neuronal activity to be modulated over prolonged periods [@nichols_engineered_2009]. The inhibitory DREADD hM4D was selectively targeted to PV-containing cells in the amygdala through the use of a Cre-dependent adeno-associated viral vector (AAV-DIO-hM4Di-mCherry) infused into the amygdala in transgenic mice (PV-Cre knockin). This technique ensured that an inhibitory receptor was expressed only in PV^+^ cells of the amygdala [@tanahira_parvalbumin_2009]. CNO or a vehicle (VEH) control was systemically administered 1 hr before auditory fear conditioning with a 0.5 mA footshock to inhibit PV^+^ cells during memory encoding. The next day, animals were sacrificed 90 min after testing in a novel context and immunohistochemistry for Arc protein was performed.

Inhibiting PV^+^ interneurons during auditory fear conditioning increased the number of neurons allocated to the LA component of the engram. No difference in freezing behavior between animals treated with CNO or VEH (Figure 4.4a; unpaired t test, P > 0.5) was observed, but mice treated with CNO displayed an increased proportion of Arc^+^ cells in the LA (Figure 4.4b; P < 0.01; Mann-Whitney U test, P < 0.05). No relationship was observed between percentage of time spent freezing and Arc^+^ proportion (Figure 4.4c; CNO, R2 = 0.015; VEH R2 < 0.001). Together, these findings suggest that reduced PV^+^ interneuron activity during auditory fear conditioning increases the number of cells allocated to the engram without influencing memory strength. 

![**PV+ inhibition during auditory fear conditioning increases the proportion of Arc+ neurons during subsequent retrieval.** (a) Both groups treated with CNO and VEH showed similar freezing to tone. (b) The proportion of Arc+ neurons in the LA was greater in mice treated with CNO. (c) No relationship was seen between freezing behaviour and Arc+ proportion in mice treated with VEH or CNO. (d) Representative images of sections with virally infected PV+ interneurons expressing mCherry (red), Arc (green), and DAPI (blue). The LA is outlined. (n = 9, VEH; n = 11, CNO). * P < 0.05. Data is expressed as mean ± sem. \label{ref_a_figure}](source/figures/figure_4.jpg)

The LA can be subdivided into distinct subnuclei on the basis of extra-amygdalar connectivity [@romanski_somatosensory_1993; @sah_amygdaloid_2003]. To explore whether the allocation of neurons to the engram in our experiments varied depending upon their location within the LA, stereological estimates of Arc^+^ proportion in PV-Cre mice treated with CNO or VEH were divided among the dorsal (LAd), ventral-medial (LAvm), and ventral-lateral (LAvl) subnuclei (Figure 4.5a). This analysis revealed that Arc^+^ proportion varied between these regions in animals treated with CNO (Figure 4.5B; P < 0.05), but not in the VEH group (P > 0.05). Furthermore, the LAd, which had the greatest proportion of Arc^+^ cells in CNO-treated animals, was also the only subnucleus in which we observed a difference following PV^+^ inhibition (unpaired t test, P < 0.01). These findings suggest that the increase in the size of the engram we observed could have been driven exclusively by changes in the recruitment of LAd neurons.

![**Inhibition of PV+ cells increases the proportion of Arc+ cells in the LAd** (a) Anatomy of the amygdala from anterior (-1.22 mm from bregma) to posterior (-2.18 mm) illustrating the distinction between the LAd, LAvm, and LAvl. Adapted from Paxinos and Franklin. (b) The LAd contained a higher proportion of Arc+ cells in animals treated with CNO and was the only subnucleus in which a difference in Arc+ proportion was observed when compared to VEH controls (n = 9, VEH; n = 11, CNO). * P < 0.05 with unpaired Student’s t test. Data is expressed as mean ± sem. \label{ref_a_figure}](source/figures/figure_5.jpg)

