# Discussion

## Summary of Findings
Memories are thought to be represented in the brain by discrete biophysical changes [@eichenbaum_still_2016, @josselyn_finding_2015, @tonegawa_memory_2015]. These changes, collectively referred to as an engram, are widely distributed throughout the brain and include a range of alterations, from epigenetics to synaptic connectivity and neural excitability. Although little is known about how information is encoded within engrams [@eichenbaum_still_2016], recent studies have shown that neurons active during learning are recruited into sparse ensembles whose reactivation at later time points is necessary and sufficient for memory recall [@han_selective_2009,  @kim_memory_2013, @liu_optogenetic_2012]. In the amygdala, these ensembles are primarily composed of those cells that were most strongly activated by the stimuli present during learning, with the results of some studies indicating that the size of these neuronal ensembles is constrained by mechanisms that allocate only a proportion of the most excitable cells to the engram ([@han_neuronal_2007, @yiu_neurons_2014]. Theoretical studies investigating this process of competitive memory allocation have suggested that this constraint facilitates the implementation of efficient, specific memory representations [@feng_mechanisms_2016]. However, empirical evidence for the mechanisms that mediate this constraint has not yet been collected.

In this work, I have examined the process of engram formation in the LA and attempted to prove that inhibitory interneurons constrain the number of neurons allocated to the engram to a sparse trace. First, I demonstrated that the immediate early gene Arc can be used to visualize neurons allocated to the engram of an auditory fear memory in the LA. Second, I demonstrated that the LA component of an engram remains stable despite variations in the strength of the memory. Lastly, I tested whether inhibitory PV^+^ interneurons in the amygdala are involved in memory allocation by inhibiting their activity during auditory fear conditioning. I observed that the inhibition of PV^+^ interneurons increased the size of the LA engram, confirming predictions made in modeling studies regarding the role of inhibitory interneurons in mediating a process of competition between neurons during memory encoding that constrains the engram to a sparse population.

## The use of IEGs to identify the engram
There is a wide variety of techniques used in neuroscience to measure the activity of the brain. One such technique involves the use of immediate early genes (IEGs). IEG analysis allows researchers that study the brain in fine morphological detail with fixed tissue histology and microscopy to obtain a rough estimate of neural activity by exploiting the fact that many genes are reliably transcribed and translated into protein following intense neural activity. When examining fixed brain tissue specimens, immunohistochemical staining for these genes permits the cells that were most active in the period of time directly before fixation to be identified.
Genes used for IEG analysis share a number of common properties. Crucially, they are all expressed constitutively at very low levels, but increase their expression rapidly and dramatically following the types of high frequency activity associated with synaptic plasticity and neural encoding [@guzowski_environment-specific_1999-1]. The physiological function of these genes is diverse, but many are involved in synaptic plasticity and other processes that allow neurons to modify their function in response to external input [@guzowski_mapping_2005]. Genes used for IEGs also tend to be highly conserved across species, making them appropriate targets for study in a wide variety of animal models.

Activity-regulated cytoskeletal-associated protein (Arc) is an IEG that has the specific advantage of being selectively expressed only in excitatory principal neurons (Vazdarjanova et al., 2006). Arc interacts with the synaptic machinery of receptor endocytosis to metaplastically regulate synapses that have recently undergone long-term potentiation [@bramham_arc_2010], and although its function has not been fully described, it has been used in a large body of work to identify neurons participating in engrams based on their activity during memory encoding or retrieval [@gouty-colomer_arc_2015, @liu_optogenetic_2012, @reijmers_localization_2007, @tayler_reactivation_2013].

## Arc expression increases during training and testing
In order to validate the use of Arc to measure engrams in this study, immunohistochemistry for Arc was performed after either auditory fear training or testing the density of Arc^+^ cells compared to treatment groups in which no training was given (homecage) or in non-learning control groups (tone only, context only, immediate shock). In all but the intercalated cell masses, the density of Arc^+^ cells was greater in animals sacrificed after either training or testing than any control groups, suggesting that the increase in Arc across the LA seen during training and testing was specifically due to the activation of neuronal ensembles involved in the encoding and retrieval of an associative memory. It was also determined that the density of Arc^+^ cells was equivalent between testing and training conditions within all brain regions, consistent with the hypothesis that similar patterns of activity are induced in the brain during both encoding and retrieval [@reijmers_localization_2007, @tayler_reactivation_2013].

The increase in Arc seen throughout the amygdala is highly consistent with the current understanding of the storage and retrieval of fearful memories. Although the LA, which acts as the primary sensory interface of the amygdala contains the essential components of the engram for encoding sensory associations, activity in the BA and CeA is thought to underlie the inclusion of contextual details and fear expression, respectively [@tovote_neuronal_2015]. The lack of Arc response seen in the intercalated cell masses is likely due to the fact that they are primarily composed of GABAergic interneurons [@ehrlich_amygdala_2009], which do not express Arc [@vazdarjanova_spatial_2006]. 

## Stereological counting to measure the engram
In order to accurately measure the proportion of neurons allocated to an engram, unbiased, systematic stereological procedures were used. By systematically drawing samples from a large population, the practice of stereology allows geometrical quantities to be estimated without sacrificing accuracy or efficiency. When attempting to measure the number of cells in a region of the brain, exhaustive counting of dense cellular populations becomes formidably time-consuming. In addition, sectioning tissue often leads to cell fragments, which can produce estimates of cell number that differ from the true number of cells present. Stereological techniques overcome these issues by drawing samples for counting from a large total volume in a statistically unbiased way, so the density of cells within a smaller counted area can be extrapolated to represent the larger volume.

To obtain an accurate ratio of Arc^+^ to total neurons in the LA, serial sections were analyzed using optical fractionation. Optical fractionation begins with the collection of serial sections throughout the region of interest, followed by the systematic random distribution of three-dimensional counting frames within those sections. The distance between sections and the size and density of counting frames is determined before the experiment begins in order to achieve an appropriate level of statistical accuracy [@west_unbiased_1991].

## Memory retrieval activates a constant proportion of cells in the amygdala despite varying memory strength
The hypothesis that competitive inhibitory interactions enforce sparsity within the LA engram suggests that all memories will be distributed among neural ensembles of the same size, regardless of the content or intensity of those memories. One way to test whether this is the case is to manipulate memory strength (ie. the distinctiveness and/or intensity of learned associations) and investigate whether this alters the number of neurons allocated to the engram. Because the strength of Pavlovian conditioning memories is a function of the valence of the US and the salience of the CS [@itzhak_strength_2014], maniplations of the intensity of US footshock delivered during auditory fear conditioning was explored as a method to increase fear memory strength. Indeed, increasing footshock was associated with greater time spent freezing to the tone 24 hrs after training.

Stereological counting of the proportion of neurons active during retrieval did not reveal a relationship between memory strength and the size of the engram. All animals that showed elevated freezing during tone presentation displayed a higher degree of Arc labeling in the LA compared to animals that remained in their homecage, indicating that successful retrieval of a fear association was associated with reactivation of a small subset of LA neurons. However, there was no difference in the size of this population between groups trained with low (0.3 mA), medium (0.5 mA), or high (0.75 mA) footshock. Furthermore, no relationship was seen between an animal’s degree of freezing to the tone and the proportion of Arc^+^ cells in the LA. These results suggest that all auditory fear engrams are stored in similarly sized populations of neurons in the LA (~12% in these experiments). 

These findings do not preclude the existence of differences between the LA engrams of strong or weak memories. Rather, they only suggest that it is the number of neurons involved that remains constant. There are many components of the engram that the approach taken in this study was unable to detect and it is possible that characteristics of similarly-sized memory ensembles may vary along these other dimensions. Indeed, it has been shown that engram neurons are more intensely activate during the retrieval of strong memories [@gouty-colomer_arc_2015]. Furthermore, it is possible that the size of engrams in the LA may change over time and that the number of neurons activated during retrieval may be reduced due to extinction or consolidation. One previous study that reported a positive relationship between the strength of auditory fear memory and the number of reactivated neurons in the LA did so only after extinction training [@reijmers_localization_2007]. Thus, it is possible that the number of reactivated neurons in the engram may bear a significant relation to memory strength in conditions in which the memory trace has been degraded or suppressed. Decreased memory strength in such conditions could reflect a failure in autoassociative retrieval within the LA network, which would manifest as a lower proportion of activated neurons.

## mRNA as a time sensitive marker of neuronal activity
The primary limitation of protein-based IEG techniques for identifying the engram is an extremely poor temporal resolution. Protein expression occurs over a period of minutes and hours, whereas the sensory-behavioural events that IEG approaches attempt to investigate occur often over a time period of seconds. Thus protein-based labeling  often capture cells not only neurons active during a behavioural epoch of interest, but also those active during a broad period of time before and after. This drawback has been suggested to underlie some of the surprisingly low estimates of overlap between neural populations active during encoding and retrieval in previous studies [@josselyn_finding_2015].

One technique that is can be used to overcome the limited temporal resolution of protein-based IEG analysis is cellular compartmental analysis of temporal activity by fluorescence in situ hybridization (catFISH), which labels IEG mRNAs. This technique benefits from the fact that mRNA transcription in the nucleus begins much earlier than changes in protein expression after neural activity and has been shown to be able to identify increases in Arc mRNA associated with high frequency activity in as little as 2 mins [@guzowski_mapping_2005 ]. This stands in stark contrast to Arc protein expression, which does not peak until 60-90 minutes after activity. The catFISH technique also allows multiple time points of activity to be detected due to the fact that mRNA transcripts produced in the nucleus transit to the dendrites to be expressed: dendritic Arc indicates activity between 20-60 min ago while nuclear Arc indicates activity with < 16 min.

## Arc mRNA reveals sparse activation of LA neurons during fear memory retrieval
In order to demonstrate that the stable proportion of engram cells observed with multiple shock conditions was not due to an over-inclusive labeling technique, catFISH and stereological counting was performed to determine the proportion of neurons activated within a narrow time window around encoding or retrieval of an auditory fear memory. This investigation produced a similar result as the previous investigation involving protein-based IEGs. Increased shock intensity was associated with more strongly expressed memories, but there was no difference in the size of the LA component of the engram between any group during training or testing. This suggest that, even when correcting for the temporal inaccuracy of protein-based IEGs, the proportion of neurons allocated to the engram in memories of different strengths remains constant.

Interestingly, despite the narrow temporal window afforded by catFISH, a similar, slightly greater, proportion of engram neurons (15%) was recorded in comparison to experiments involving protein-based IEG, even when only cells with intranuclear fluorescence were counted. It is unclear whether the smaller time window of capture was offset by a lower threshold of detection with catFISH, or whether the previous protein based IEG analysis was simply accurate enough. However, the relative similarity in estimates of the engram population between this mRNA-based approach, protein-based results, and the multitude of other studies on engram size [@an_long-term_2012, @ghosh_neuronal_2015, @gouty-colomer_arc_2015, @herry_switching_2008-1, @quirk_fear_1995] provide further support for the hypothesis that memory traces are actively constrained to a sparse population and validation of this experimental approach involving Arc.

## DREADDS to manipulate cellular excitability
In order to selectively modulate the activity of PV^+^ interneurons during the acquisition of fear memories, designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs) were targeted to PV-expressing neurons with a Cre-dependent viral vector. DREADDs are modified G-protein coupled receptors that are activated by a specific synthetic ligand, clozapine-N-oxide (CNO), that otherwise has no activity in the body [@armbruster_evolving_2007]. Several varieties of DREADDs have been created that have different functions on neural activity. The DREADD subtype used in this investigation, hM4Di, is an inhibitory receptor that decreases cellular activity by lowering the activity of cAMP, reducing potassium channel conductance, and inhibiting presynaptic neurotransmitter release.

DREADDs allow neural activity to be modulated over a time-scale that is both appropriate and highly convenient for behavioural neurobiological experiments. When CNO is injected intraperitoneally, DREADD activation begins within minutes, peaks after 50 minutes, and dissipates several hours later [@alexander_remote_2009]. This provides a sufficiently large time window for behavioural experiments to be performed while also ensuring that experiments performed the following day are free of the effects of lingering DREADD activity. The consequences of the prolonged neural modulation that DREADDs provide during the few hours that CNO is present are not entirely understood, however. Dramatic differences in outcomes between studies that used prolonged, pharmacological manipulations and precise optogenetic approaches have been identified [@goshen_dynamics_2011], and it may be possible that the brain is able to compensate for the effect of DREADDs in some way.

## Inhibition of PV^+^ interneurons increases the size of the LA engram
Computational modeling of memory formation in the LA has suggested that competitive interactions mediated by inhibitory interneurons are necessary for maintaining the size of memory traces despite variations in excitability [@feng_mechanisms_2016]. In order to empirically test this hypothesis, DREADDS were selectively targeted to PV-containing interneurons in the amygdala with the use of PV-Cre transgenic mice and a Cre-dependent viral vector. This allowed a proportion of PV^+^ interneurons to be inhibited during auditory fear conditioning to assess their role in constraining the size of the engram in the LA. Of the many interneuron subtypes present, we focused on PV^+^ interneurons because of their implication in the regulation of principal neuron excitability [@spampanato_interneurons_2011] and the modulation of fear memories [@trouche_fear_2013]. 

Remarkably, inhibiting PV^+^ cells during training increased the number of neurons allocated to the engram (Figure 4), suggesting that they may play some role in the mechanisms that govern the formation of neuronal ensembles during memory encoding. This increase was modest (11 –> 15%), but represented the fact that engrams were 35% larger when formed under conditions of reduced PV^+^ activity. Although this investigation is unable to describe exactly how this expansion in the memory trace occurred, these results corroborate modeling studies regarding the importance of inhibitory interneurons in making memory allocation a competitive process [@kim_assignment_2013, @feng_mechanisms_2016],  the most recent of which specifically proposed that decreases in the plasticity of inhibitory connections would lead to an increase in the number of cells that undergo plasticity during fear conditioning.

These results do not preclude the fact that other interneuron subtypes may also be involved in constraining the size of the engram [@stefanelli_hippocampal_2016]. Indeed, it may be possible that this increase in the size of the engram observed during PV^+^ interneuron inhibition was due to a disruption of the PV^+^ and SOM^+^  microcircuits that shape the flow of sensory input [@wolff_amygdala_2014]. It may also have been the case that reducing inhibitory PV^+^ cell firing made the LA more excitable and increased the number of neurons that were excited above plasticity thresholds. However, in light of existing work demonstrating the competitive nature and remarkable stability of the LA engram, as well as computational models predicting the existence of competitive inhibitory interactions, it is perhaps best to assume that this finding has at least significantly advanced the hypothesis that interneurons play some role in the formation of memory engrams.

## Subnuclear location of PV^+^ inhibition-related engram increase
In order to understand the nature of these findings in light of the anatomical distinctions that have been proposed between the LA’s dorsal (LAd), ventral-medial (LAvm), and ventral-lateral (LAvl) subnuclei [@romanski_somatosensory_1993, sah_amygdaloid_2003], the stereological results of this experiment involving PV^+^ cell inhibition were divided up between these regions to obtain independent estimates of Arc^+^ proportion. These three subdivisions of the LA have been shown to receive different forms of innervation from the rest of the brain, with the LAd receiving the majority of fast, thalamic, auditory projections and the ventral regions receiving slower, cortical inputs [@romanski_somatosensory_1993]. Thus, it is possible that salient sensory information encoded during auditory fear conditioning may be differentially allocated across these regions.

Interestingly, analyzing the proportion of Arc^+^ neurons across these subnuclei revealed that a significantly higher proportion of neurons were allocated to the memory trace in the LAd in animals in which PV^+^ interneurons were inhibited during training (Figure 5). Furthermore, this increase in Arc^+^ proportion in the LAd accounted for the majority of the increased size of the engram, suggesting that PV^+^ interneurons may play a more significant role in regulating the excitability of LAd neurons. Indeed, it has been noted that the ratio of excitatory to inhibitory inputs is lower in more dorsally located neurons in the LA [@samson_spatially_2006]. There was no difference in the density of engram cells between subdivisions in control animals. Thus, it is possible that, under normal conditions, neurons throughout the LA are allocated to the engram of an auditory fear memory with equal probability. It is unclear whether the increase in the proportion of engram cells in the LAd is due to greater innervation by auditory thalamic projections [@romanski_somatosensory_1993], different plastic properties [@repa_two_2001], or tighter regulation from inhibitory interneurons [@kim_assignment_2013-1]. However, these results do provide compelling evidence for significant functional differences between subnuclei of the amygdala with regard to the composition of engrams that deserves further exploration.

