# Conclusion

## Future directions
Although this study provides interesting early evidence for the involvement of interneurons in memory allocation, there are many more unanswered questions remaining. Principal among them is the question of whether only PV^+^ interneurons influence the size of engram populations or whether other interneuronal subtypes are involved as well. Indeed, it has recently been suggested that, in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, SOM^+^ interneurons in particular play a central role in shaping the size of memory ensembles [@stefanelli_hippocampal_2016]. There are many functional and anatomical differences between the dentate gyrus and the LA, including with regards to interneuronal subtypes [@amaral_dentate_2007, @houser_interneurons_2007]. However, it is possible that SOM^+^ interneurons may play a role in the LA as well. Investigating whether inhibition of SOM^+^ interneurons during fear conditioning might lead to similar expansions in the engram proportion will be the first step in expanding our understanding of the role of distinct interneuronal subtypes in memory allocation.
Future understanding of the ideas behind this investigation would also benefit from a more detailed characterization of PV^+^ interneuron activity during memory encoding and retrieval. For instance, experiments in which PV^+^ cells were excited rather than inhibited, perhaps through the use of excitatory DREADDs, could be performed in order to determine whether memory traces could be constrained even further. Furthermore, electrophysiological recording studies could be performed to determine whether interneurons fire more strongly during conditions of strong memory and match the patterns of activity proposed under the hypothesis of competitive inhibitory interactions. It is also possible that analyzing the characteristics of inhibitory potentials received from principal cells during auditory fear condition could allow the source of inhibition to be determined (ie. from PV^+^ or SOM^+^ cells).

Theoretical studies on memory allocation in the LA propose that constraining the memory trace is advantageous by promoting a balance between the specificity and robustness of learned associations [@kim_synaptic_2015]. Although our study did not reveal any relationship between memory strength and the size of the engram, it would be interesting to determine whether memories that are stored in more neurons differ in less obvious ways. For example, exposing mice in which the size of the engram had been manipulated to tones with varying degrees of similarity to the tone they were exposed to during auditory fear conditioning could allow an effect of engram size on memory generalization to be detected. Additionally, the resistance of memories stored in more neurons to natural forgetting over time or extinction would be explored. Both of these findings could have important implications in the study of anxiety disorders and PTSD, which are often conceived of as symptoms of over-generalized and hyper-persistent threat detection (@lapiz-bluhm_neurobehavioral_2014, @tovote_neuronal_2015]. 
Although there was a cursory investigation into the spatial location of engram cells within the LA, the significant functional and anatomical differences that have been identified between subnuclei of the LA merits further investigation. The finding that the LAd in particular showed the greatest increase in engram cells is interesting considering several lines of evidence that implicate the most dorsal aspects of the LA in receiving the greatest amount of sensory innervation and mediating the earliest, most transient forms of plasticity during fear conditioning [@repa_two_2001, @romanski_somatosensory_1993]. It could be fruitful to use techniques such as CLARITY, which involves removing lipids from brain tissue to produce samples that are capable of being imaged in three dimensions [@tomer_advanced_2014], to analyze the distribution of cells throughout the entire volume of the amygdala without damaging the tissue or introducing variability that prevents accurately defining the subnuclei. Such an investigation could also be combined with staining for molecular markers or labeling of sensory projections that would allow the boundaries between subnuclei to be defined and the relationship between the input a neuron receives and its likelihood to be allocated to the engram to be examined. With such an experimental approach, it would also be possible to examine the spatial distribution of engram neurons throughout the amygdala to uncover patterns that might be important for understanding how information is encoded in these neuronal ensembles. Indeed, if the LA does implement sparse distributed memory, memories that share similar features (eg. sensory modality, context, time of occurrence) should be stored in overlapping groups of neurons. It may one day be possible to identify how these overlapping subsets of engram contribute to shared content and reverse engineer meaning from engrams.

## Conclusion
Inspired by previous discoveries from our lab and the conclusions made by computational researchers to explain those results, I have endeavored in this thesis to provide support for the hypothesis that inhibitory neurons shape how memories are encoded in the brain. My primary finding is that silencing PV^+^ inhibitory interneurons in the lateral amygdala increases the number of neurons that are allocated to an ensemble underlying the memory of a conditioned fear association. Although this investigation is far from the wide-ranging body of work that will be necessary to characterize the role interneurons play in shaping engrams, I believe what I have done is an important step in advancing our understanding of the conserved mechanisms of memory encoding. 
Validating predictions made by theorists not only provides further insights into how the brain works, it also confirms the accuracy and usefulness of theoretical models themselves. As the field of neuroscience progresses, these computational models will only become more and more useful. After all, the brain is fundamentally a computational organ. It is my opinion that we are still awaiting the great breakthroughs in neuroscience that will allow us to enhance human performance and cure neurological illness. However, to make these breakthroughs we will need honest, and efficient collaboration between experimentalists and theoreticians. This may involve diverse skill sets within labs, more interdisciplinary training, and the open sharing of data and code, all of which will allow both sides to be more productive. Indeed, there will soon be so much expertise required in both the technical and theoretical aspects of neuroscience that that it will be the only way anything will ever get done.

